---
layout: post
title: "Eight tips to effectively supervise students during their Master's thesis"
date: 2021-07-30 09:00:00 +0200
categories:
 - PhD
---

I am a fan of knowledge transfer between peers, teaching what I know to others
and learning back from them. At University I frequently helped my fellow course
mates with the material, so I was very interested in formally mentoring students
when I started my PhD. Luckily my supervisor, who is really talented at this,
agreed to let me help him with supervising some Master's theses. In this article
I present eight lessons that I learned by watching him at work and trying on my
own. An edited version of this article appeared as a [Nature Career
Column][ncc]!

<!-- more -->

I supervised three Master's students in the past year. One of them was quite
good and independent, did not need a lot of guidance and could take care of most
things on his own, while the other two required a fair amount of help from us,
one of them even coming close to not graduating successfully. Dealing with the
difficult situations is when I learned the most important lessons, but
regardless of the ability of the students a common thread soon appeared.

But first, here's a brief digression on how that happened. While I was writing a
draft for this blog, I noticed an interesting article on Nature's newsletter.
While I was reading it, I felt its style was quite similar to what I usually aim
for in this blog: use headlines to highlight the important points, and elaborate
on those with a few paragraphs. I then noticed the author of that column was a
PhD student, and I thought: "how comes she has an article there? Why can she do
that? Can I do that?". I quickly found [how to do it][ncs], finished the draft
and sent it to them, and, after eight rounds of review in two months, the
article was finally up! The editor was very responsive and we could iterate
quickly on the manuscript, and the quality of the writing is so much better than
what I had originally sent in. On the other hand, I sometimes felt the message
was being warped a bit too much. Below you can find the original draft that I
sent in, but you must head to [Nature's website][ncc] to read the edited piece.
Enjoy!

## Write a plan before offering the thesis

Regardless of how the idea for a thesis comes about, it is important to make
sure that the project is sufficiently specific and can be completed in about six
months. Drafting a two-pages plan (think of an extended abstract for a
conference) can be a good way to make sure the project is detailed and
realistic. Such a document is also easy to share online, on the website of the
group or Twitter, as well as on a job board at your department.

Make sure to cover the following: a general introduction to the research subject
with a few key publications, the gap in the literature that the project aims to
close, the goal of the thesis, that is, how exactly the gap identified above is
to be closed, a breakdown of that goal into four or five tasks that are to be
achieved during the course of the thesis, specific qualifications that
candidates are expected to have, and formalities such as contact information,
starting dates, whether a publication is to be expected at the end, and so on.

## Meet your student regularly
Meeting regularly with your student and making sure that the project is on track
and on time is the most important thing that you can do as a supervisor. In most
cases, this requires less than an hour per week, but some students may require
more attention. The weekly meetings should start with the student summarizing
what they did in the previous week and what issues they encountered, followed by
a discussion and brainstorming session on these issues and/or the next steps. At
the end of the meeting it must be clear what is expected for the next week.

The first few weeks should be used to get the student up to speed with the topic
of the project. They should read the publications listed in the plan and a few
more to get familiar with the state of the art and the specific methods that
they are supposed to work with. During this time you should take care of
administrative matters such as making sure that the student has accounts to
access computational resources, VPN, e-mail, Wi-Fi, private GitHub repositories,
and so on.
 
## Make them write regularly
A good Master's thesis should contain about 60 pages of written material. Good
writing takes time, especially for students who are not used to it and may even
need to use a foreign language. Therefore, it is important to write regularly,
or at the very least keep detailed notes of what should be included in the
manuscript to avoid missing important details later on.

As a supervisor you should occasionally remind your student to write what they
are doing, and make sure that they are aware since the beginning how the
manuscript should be structured, which chapters should be included, how long
each of them should be, the expected writing style, what template to use, and
other specifics. Make use of the weekly meetings to provide continuous feedback
on the manuscript.

The first two to four weeks at the beginning of the project are a good time to
start writing the first chapters of their thesis, including an introduction to
the topic and the required background knowledge, while the last three or four
weeks should be allocated to writing the remaining chapters of the manuscript,
namely results and conclusions, ensuring it forms a coherent whole, and
preparing and rehearsing the slide deck for the defense.

## Probe for correct understanding
Probing for correct understanding is especially important when working with
unprepared students. Asking "did you understand?" every five minutes is not
enough and can even be counterproductive, scaring away the less assertive
students. A way to avoid this situation is to encourage the student to rephrase
what you explained with their own words, provide a detailed breakdown of a
certain task, anticipate possible problems, and so on. This can also catch those
situations when your student is convinced they understand something while they
actually do not, for example when they have not considered the issue carefully
enough.
 
## Adapt supervision to the student
The best students are organized, independent and capable, but not everybody is
born like that. Each student requires a different type of supervision to cater
their weak points, and you should find the best method early in the course of
the project. This may mean using Trello boards or a shared Google Doc to record
tasks to help disorganized students, defining tasks in detail and walking
through them carefully with dependent students, and taking extra time to explain
and fill knowledge gaps of unprepared students.

## Be supportive
Always be supportive. A student avoiding communicating their problems because
they fear you is counterproductive for everybody. Ask what they are struggling
with and help them overcome obstacles by providing helpful resources. Take time
to walk them through larger issues that they cannot solve on their own in a
reasonable amount of time. Find ways to help them be confident. For example, one
student of mine found it very helpful to text me brief updates outside of our
scheduled meetings.

If, on the opposite side, the student turns out to be fairly independent and
capable on their own, let them work and do not micromanage. Simply verify their
progress and gently push them for more. Be ready to catch them if they fall. I
fell in this category and I appreciated my supervisor not getting in the way and
letting me work as I preferred, while periodically letting me know that I was on
the right track.
 
## When things go bad... Make another plan
Not all projects can be successful despite your (and your student's) best
efforts, therefore it is a good idea to have a plan B (and C) ready since the
beginning. Halfway through the project is a good time to evaluate how likely it
is that the thesis can be handed in on time and as originally planned. Your top
priority however should be making the student graduate successfully. This may
require either foregoing some of the tasks that were planned at the beginning or
obtaining an extension of a few months if the situation allows it.

The student should be made aware that the success of their thesis is at risk,
and you should ask them to come up with a reasonable week-by-week plan until the
end, with the mutual understanding that failing to adhere to said plan may
seriously impact their chances of graduation. I did this with a former student,
she stuck to the plan and the thesis was handed in on time.

## Have a final feedback round
After the thesis is handed in and defended, you should meet the student one last
time to tell them their grade, which should be based on a grading rubric that
includes items such as scientific quality of the results and methods followed,
problem solving skills, work organization, independence, good writing and
presentations, and so on. Walk the student through each individual item and
explain your motivation for the given score, best by recalling relevant events
that happened in the past months. Offer the student the possibility of giving
feedback on your supervision and suggest things they thought you could do
better. Lastly, if you enjoyed working with them, consider offering them a
position in your lab or writing a recommendation letter for them!


 [ncc]: https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-021-02028-1
 [ncs]: https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-03369-8
