---
layout: post
title: "The 37% rule"
date: 2022-10-23 12:00:00 +0200
categories:
 - Math
---

Suppose you want to pick the best item out of a collection, but you must decide
after seeing each item whether to keep it and walk away or discard it and keep
looking, loosing this item forever. An apartment search in competitive cities is
an example of this kind of decision process. The optimal stopping rule is to
examine the first 37% items without committing, then choose the item that is the
best among the ones seen so far; incredibly, following this strategy one selects
the absolute best item in 37% of the cases. But what happens when the best item
is *not* selected?

<!-- more -->

This problem is also known as the [secretary problem][sp] (where a boss has to
pick the best candidate interviewing for a secretary position), and it is not
hard to show that the optimal cutoff is $n/e\approx 0.3678\cdot n$ and the
probability of selecting the best is also $1/e$. What is amazing is that this
probability does not decrease with the number of items to choose from, so even
if one could, for example, date the entire world population, they would end up
choosing the best partner with a probability of 37%. Conveniently, when one does
not have too many items to choose from, the probability of picking the best is
even a bit higher, for example it is about 41% with ten items.

As I tend to be rather risk-averse, I could not help but wonder what happens
when the best is *not* selected? In other words, what does an "average" choice
looks like? Fortunately, this decision process is quite easy to simulate, for
example in R:

```r
choose37 <- function(ranks) {
  m <- as.integer(length(ranks) * exp(-1))
  best_of_m <- length(ranks)
  for(i in 1:length(ranks)) {
    r <- ranks[i]
    if(r < best_of_m) {
      if(i <= m) {
        best_of_m <- r
      }
      else {
        break
      }
    }
  }
  c(i, r)
}
```

This function takes as input the ranks of the items so that the best has rank
one. We can now simulate random set of items and choose according to this rule
simply via `choose37(sample(n))`. I then simulated 100,000 draws from 1,000
objects and computed statistics on the chosen rank.

These are the probabilities for the first ten ranks:

| Rank | Prob.   |
|------|---------|
| 1    | 0,368   |
| 2    | 0,137   |
| 3    | 0,0634  |
| 4    | 0,0311  |
| 5    | 0,0167  |
| 6    | 0,00832 |
| 7    | 0,0054  |
| 8    | 0,00324 |
| 9    | 0,00185 |
|------|---------|
| Cum. | 0,63501 |

Therefore, the 37% rule will pick an item ranked in the top 1% with 63.5%
probability. The distribution of ranks looks like this:

| Min. | 1st Qu. | Median | Mean  | 3rd Qu. | Max.  |
|------|---------|--------|-------|---------|-------|
| 1    | 1       | 2      | 184.5 | 316     | 1,000 |

Even though in some cases we end up with the absolute worst item, on average we
picked the top 18% and with 75% probability within the top 31.6%. That is not
bad at all!

For a comprehensive picture, the (empirical) probability distribution looks like
this:

![probs](/images/choose37/probs.png){: .center-image}

Quite interestingly, the distribution after rank 1.5% seems to be rather
uniform, with a density that likely depends on the number of items.

In conclusion, the 37% rule works extremely well compared to its simplicity!

[sp]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secretary_problem
