---
layout: post
title: "Go to conferences to meet people"
date: 2023-01-10 12:00:00 +0200
categories:
 - PhD
 - Research
---

I recently had the chance to attend the NeurIPS conferences in person in New
Orleans. Despite being a PhD student for almost four years, because of covid and
a research detour this was actually the first in-person conference I attended.
Due to its scale, with more than 2,600 accepted papers in the main track and
more than 10,000 people attending, it was an extremely overwhelming experience.

<!-- more -->

Somehow, the simple fact of being surrounded by all these busy people going
places and doing things was already somewhat tiring on its own. But it was
pretty easy to tell that I was not the only one to be tired from all the social
interactions! Many were sitting in the hallways with their back to the wall with
their laptop, some scrolling Twitter and some on Overleaf. I was also surprised
by the number of people from industry, but it makes a lot of sense to use
NeurIPS as chance for talent scouting.

The information overload was insane, with two poster sessions each day for six
days and more than 400 posters in every session, and all the chatter about
ChatGPT erupting on Twitter. You are obviously not expected to meaningfully
engage with even an appreciable portion of the posters. As my research topics
only constitute a tiny portion of the total poster area, I resorted to simply
walking around and reading the posters' titles, snapping a picture of those that
sound most interesting for me or my colleagues, with the idea of coming back to
them at a later point. Even this took me about 45 minutes of each poster
session!

It was while dining at a restaurant with some new friends that I had an
important insight:

> The purpose of conferences is to network and connect with people.

Yes, it sounds really obvious and dumb, but as I said this is the first
in-person conference I attend, and the virtual substitutes we tried during covid
fell rather short.

I realized this when I started chatting with three guys from the table next to
ours, because I thought I knew one of them (turns out I didn't). They were
colleagues from the same company and were rather surprised when I told them that
I and the people at my table all met each other at the conference. They asked
"how did you meet?" and I replied simply "we started talking". This almost
sounds comical now, but you need to realize that this was a computer science
conference with a large number of.. introvert at best, and socially challenged
at worst, people.

I confirmed the principle above when I talked to a team lead next to their
poster about finding a job in the industry. I was afraid I'd bother him with a
question he probably heard a thousand times and my boring story he probably
doesn't care about, but he was actually super nice, gave me a few interesting
insights and important "insider" tips about recruitment. He then left me his
business card and told me to feel free to contact him if I have something
interesting.

You see, **almost everybody attending a conference expects to connect with
people**. There's no need to worry about asking stupid questions or being
boring. Unless you are rude or inopportune there's really nothing to fear about
approaching anybody at a conference, the worst that can happen is that they
forget you after ten minutes.

In particular, **senior people already *expect* to be approached by juniors**.
Yann LeCun knows there will be a bunch of people queuing to take a selfie with
him, so one more person will not make much of a difference for him (I used my
chance to ask him a research question instead). Similarly, team leads and
principal investigators know that interested people will ask them questions
about working with them or at their institution, and may even be actively
looking for motivated people/

Moreover, **everybody loves to talk about their work**, so there is also no need
to worry about asking "stupid" or basic questions. Especially in this field,
most people are very chill and won't act smug when consulted. One of the friends
I made there works with medical doctors and said that things in that community
are different and juniors are frequently looked-down by seniors.

Some friends who recently started their PhD asked me whether this or that
conference or symposium would be interesting to attend, or lamented that they
went to an event and did not find a lot of interesting research. After NeurIPS,
my advice is simple:

> Go to conferences, meet people, be shameless (politely).

In our field of computer science, machine learning computational biology etc.,
the technical and scientific content of a conference is less interesting because
it probably already appeared as a pre-print months earlier (I remember seeing
the poster of some articles I felt were already rather old, that's how fast the
field is moving) or will soon be available in the proceedings.
